# 1.1 Statements and Structure of a Program Notes

## Statements
A computer program is a sequence of instructions that tell the computer what to do. 
**A Statement** is a type of instruction that causes the programs to perform some action. 
>Statements are by the far most common type of instruction in a C++ program.
>>This is because they are the smallest independent unit of computation in the C++ language. In that regard, they act much like sentences do in natural language. 

In C++, when we want to have our program do something, we typically write statements.
>Most (but not all) statements in C++ end in semicolon. 
>>If you see a line that ends in a semicolon, it's probably a statement. 

In a high- level language such as C++, a single statement may compile into many machine language instructions. 

>**Advance Level**
There are many different Kinds of Statements in C++
>* Declaration statements
>* Jump Statements
>* Expression statements
>* Compound Statements
>* Selection Statements (conditionals)
>* Iteration statements (Loops)
>* Try Blocks

## Functions and the main function
in C++ statements are typically grouped into units called functions 
> **A Function** is a collection of statements that get executed sequentially (in order from top to bottom).

> **Rule** 
> Every C++ program must have a special function named ==main== (all lower case) 

When a program is run, the statements inside of ==main== are executed in sequential order 
* Programs typically terminate (finish running) after the last statement inside the function *main* has been executed (though programs may abort early in some circumstances or do some cleanup afterwards)
* Functions are typically written to do a specific job or perform some useful action. 
  * For example a function named ==max== might contain statements that figure out which of two numbers is larger.
  * A function named ==calculateGrade== might calculate a student's grade from a set of test scores and so on...

> **Nomenclature** 
> When discussing functions it is fairly common shorthand to append a pair of parenthesis to the end of the function name. 
> For example: if you see the term ==main()== or ==doSomething()==, this is the shorthand for functions named ==main== or ==doSomething== respectively. 
> This helps differentiate functions from other things with names (such as variables) without having to write the word "function" each time.
>> In programming, the name of a function (or object, type, template and etc...) is called its **identifier**. 

**Characters and text**
The earliest computers were designed primarily for mathematical calculations and data processing. As hardware improved, networking became accessible and consumer software evolved, computers also became valuable tools for written communication.
* In written language, the most basic unit of communication is the character. 
  * To simplify slightly, a character is a written symbol or mark, such as a letter, digit, punctuation mark, or mathematical symbol. 
  * When we tap an alphabetic or numeric key on our keyboard, a character is produced as a result, which can then be displayed on the screen. 
    * The following are all characters: a, 2, $, and =.
* In many cases, such as when writing words or sentences, we want to make use of more than one character. A sequence of characters is called text (also called a **string** in programming contexts).

## Dissecting Hello World!
Now that we have a brief understanding of what statements and functions are, let's return to our "Hello world" program and take a high-level look at what each line does in more detail. 
``` 
#include <iostream>

    int main() 
    {
        std::cout <<"Hello World!";
        return 0;
    } 
```
>Line 1 is a special type of line called a **preprocessor directive**. 
> * This ==#include== preprocessor directive indicates that we would like to use the contents of the ==iostream== library, which is a part of the C++ standard library that allows us to read and write text from and to the console. 
> * We need this line in order to use the ==std::cout== on line 5
>   * Excluding this line would result in a **compile error** on line 5 as the compiler wouldn't otherwise know what ==std::cout== is. 

>Line 2 is blank and is ignored by the compiler. This line merely exists to help make the program more readable to humans 

> Line 3 tells the compiler that we're going to write (define) a function whose name (identifier) is ==main==
>> As learned from above, every C++ program must have a ==main== function or it will fail to link. 
>> * This function will produce a value whose type is ==int== (an integer). 

>Line 4 and 7 tell the compiler which lines are part of the *main* function. Everything between the opening curly brace on line 4 and the closing curly brace on line 7 is considered part of the ==main== function. 
>> This is called the **function body**. 

>Line 5 is the first statement within function ==main== and is the first statement that will execute when we run our program. ==std::cout== (which stands for "character output") and the ==<<== operator allows us to display information on the console. 
>>In this case we are displaying the text ==Hello World!==. This statement creates the visible output of the program. 

>Line 6 is a **return** statement. When an executable program finishes running, the program sends a value back to the operating system in order to indicate whether it ran successfully or not. 
>> This particular return statement returns the integer value ==0== to the operating system, which means "everything wnet okay!". This is the last statement in the program that executes. 

All of the programs that we write will follow this general template or a variation on it. 

You can compile and run this program yourself and you will see it output the following to the console: 
>``` Hello World!``` 

## Syntax and Errors 
* The C++ programming language also has a syntax, which describes how the elements of your program must be written and arranged in order for the program to be considered valid. 
* When you compile your program, the compiler is responsible for making sure your program follows these syntactical rules. 
  * If your program does something that deviates from the syntax of the language, the compiler will halt compilation and issue a *_syntax error*.
* Unlike the English language, which allows for a lot of ambiguity, the syntax rules of C++ are strictly defined and upheld. Syntax errors are common. 
*  Fortunately, such errors are typically straightforward to find and fix, as the compiler (**Clang**)will generally point you right at them. Compilation of a program will only complete once all syntax errors are resolved.