# 1.2 Comments

* A **comment** is a programmer-readable note that is inserted directly into the source of the program. 
* Comments are ignored by the compiler and are for the programmer's use only 
  * IN C++ there are two different styles of comments, both of which serve the same purpose: to help programmers document the code in some way 

## Single-line comments 
The ==//== symbol begins a C++ single-line comment, which tells the compiler to ignore everything from the ==//== symbol to the end of the line. 
For example: 
```
std::cout << "Hello World!"; // Everything from here to the end of the line is ignored
```

Typically, the single-line comment is used to make a quick comment about a single line of code: 
```
std::cout << "Hello world!\n"; // std::cout lives in the iostream library
std::cout << "It is very nice to meet you!\n"; // these comments make the code hard to read
std::cout << "Yeah!\n"; // especially when lines are different lengths
```
>Having comments to the right of a line can make both the code and the comment hard to read, particularly is the line is long
>* If the lines are fairly short, the comments can simply be aligned (usually to a tab stop), like so: 

```
std::cout << "Hello world!\n";                 // std::cout lives in the iostream library
std::cout << "It is very nice to meet you!\n"; // this is much easier to read
std::cout << "Yeah!\n";                        // don't you think so?
```
>* However is lines are long, placing comments to the right can make your lines really long. IN that case, single line comments are often placed above the line it is commenting: 
```
// std::cout lives in the iostream library
std::cout << "Hello world!\n";

// this is much easier to read
std::cout << "It is very nice to meet you!\n";

// don't you think so?
std::cout << "Yeah!\n";
```

## Multi-line comments

The ==/*== and ==*/== pair of symbols denotes a C-style multi-line comment. Everything in-between the symbols is ignored: 
```
/* This is a multi-line comment.
   This line will be ignored.
   So will this one. 
*/
```
> **Warning**
> Dont use multi-line comments inside other multi-line comments. Wrapping single-line comments inside a multi-line comment is okay. 

> **Best Practice** 
> Comment your code liberally and write your comments as if you are speaking to someone who has no idea what the code does. Don't assume you'll remember why you made specific choices. 