# Introduction to objects and variables 

## Data and values 
In lesson *1.1 Statements and Structures* , we learned that the majority of instructions in a program are statements and that functions are groups of statements that execute sequentially. 
>* The statements inside the function perform actions that (hopefully) generate whatever result the program was designed to produce

But how do programs actually produce results? 
> They do so by manipulating (reading, changing and writing) data
> In computing, data is any information that can be moved, processed ro stored by a computer 

> **Key Insight**
> * Programs are collections of instructions that manipulate data to produce a desired result. 
> > Computer programs (both in source code format and compiled) are technically data too, since they can be moved, processed and stored 
> However, in the context of a computer program we typically use the term "code" to mean the program and "data" to mean the information that the program works with to produce a result. 

A program can acquire data to work with in many ways: from a file or database, over a network, from the user providing input on a keyboard or from the programmer putting data directly into the source code of the program itself. 
* In the “Hello world” program from the aforementioned lesson, the text “Hello world!” was inserted directly into the source code of the program, providing data for the program to use. The program then manipulates this data by sending it to the monitor to be displayed.

In programming, a single piece of data is called a **value** (sometimes called a **data value**). Common examples include: 
* Numbers (e.g. 5 or -6.7).
* Characters, which are placed between single-quotes (e.g. 'H' or '$'). Only a single symbol may be used.
* Text, which must be placed between double-quotes (e.g. "Hello" or "H"). Text can contain 0 or more characters.

Values that are placed directly into the source code are called **literals** (covered in later topic) 

One of the most common thing to do with values is print them to the screen. For Example: 
```
#include <iostream> // for std::cout

int main()
{
    std::cout << 5;       // print the literal number `5`
    std::cout << -6.7;    // print the literal number `-6.7`
    std::cout << 'H';     // print the literal character `H`
    std::cout << "Hello"; // print the literal text `Hello`

    return 0;
}
```
If a character value or text value is not properly quoted, the compiler will try to interpret that value as if it were C++ code which will almost always results in a compilation error. 

>Literals are the easiest way to provide values for your program but they do have their drawbacks. 
>> Literals are read-only, so their values can't be modified. 
Thus if you want to store data in memory we need some other way to do this. 


## Random Access Memory 
The main memory in a computer is called **Random Access Memory** (often called **RAM** for short)
* When we run a program, the operating system loads the program into RAM. 
  * Any data that is hardcoded into the program itself (e.g text such as "Hello World!") is loaded at this point
* The operating system also reserves some additional RAM for the program to use while it is running. 
* Common uses for this memory are: to store values entered by the user, to store data read in a file or from a network or store values calculated while the program is running (e.g the sum of two values) so they can be used again later. 
  * You can think os RAM as a series of numbered boxes that can be used to store data while the program is running. 


## Objects and Variables 
* In C++, direct memory access is discouraged: 
  * Instead, we access memory indirectly through an object: 
    * An **object** represents a region of storage (typically RAM or a CPU register) that can hold a value. 
    * Objects also have associated properties (covered in later topics)
  
> How the compiler and operating system work to assign memory to objects is beyond the scope of this lesson. But the key point is rather than say "go get the values stored in mailbox number 7532", we can say: "go get the value stored by this object" and then let the compiler figure out where and how to retrieve the value. 
> > This means we can focus on using objects to store and retrieve values and not have to worry about where in memory those objects are actually being placed

Although objects in C++ can be unnamed (anonymous), more often we name our objects using an identifier. 
* An object with a name is called a **variable**

> **Key Insight**
> * An object is used to store a value in memory 
> * A Variable is an object that has a name (identifier)
> * Naming our objects let us refer to those objects again later in the program


## Variable Definition 
In order to use a variable in our program, we need to tell the compiler that we want one
> The most common way to do this is by using a special kind of declaration statement called a **Definition**. 
> > The difference between a *declaration* and a *definition* in later lessons. 

> **Key Insight** 
> A definition statement can be used to tell the compiler that we want to use a variable in our program 

Example: defining a variable named ==x==: 
```
int x; // defining a variable named x (type: int) 
```
At **compile-time** (when the program is being compiled), when encountering this statement, the compiler makes a note to itself that we want a variable with the name ==x== and that the variable has a data type ==int==. 
* From that point forward (with some limitations which will be discussed later), whenever we use the identifier ==x== in our code, the compiler will know that we are referring to this variable. 
* The compiler handles all  the other details about this variable for us, this includes: 
  * how much memory the object will need
  * In what kind of storage the object will be placed in (e.g in RAM or CPU register)
  * where it will be placed relative to other objects
  * When it will be created and destroyed etc... 

A variable that is created via a definition statement is said to be **defined** at the point where the definition statement is placed. 
> For now, your variables should be defined inside functions (such as ==main()==)

Here is a full program containing a variable definition statement: 

```
int main()
{
    int x; // definition of variable x 
    return 0; 
}
```

## Variable Creation 
* At **runtime** (When the program is loaded into memory and run), each object is given an actual storage location (such as RAM or CPU register) that it can use to store values. 
  * The process of reserving storage for an object's use is called **allocation**
  * Once allocation has occurred, the object has been created and can be used. 

>For the sake of example, lets say that variable ==x== is instantiated at memory location 140. 
>Whenever the program uses variable ==x==, it will access the values in memory location 140.

> **Key Insight**
> an object is "created" once actual storage has been reserved for the object's use. 

When the above program is run, execution starts at the top of ==main()==. 
* Memory for x is allocated
  * Then the program ends 


## Data types 
So far we have covered that objects are regions of storage that can store data value 

> A **Data type** (more commonly just called a **type**) determines what kind of value (e.g a number, a letter, text etc...) the object will store.

In the above example, our variable ==x== was given type ==int==, which means variable ==x== will store an integer value. 

>An **integer** is a number that can be written without a fractional components, such as ==4==, ==27==, ==0==, ==-2==, or ==-12==. For short we can say that ==x== is an ==integer variable==. 

In C++, the type of an object must be known at compile-time and that type cannot be changed without recompiling the program. 
This basically means that an integer variable can only hold integer values 
* if you want to store some other kind of value, you'll need to use a different type 

> **Key Insight**
> The data type of an object must be known at compile-time (so the compiler knows how much memory that object requires)

Integers are just one of many types that C++ supports out of the box. 
* For illustrative purposes, here’s another example of defining a variable using data type double:
```
double width; //define a variable named width, of type double 
```

C++ allows you to create your own custom types (This is something we will cover later) and its part of what makes C++ powerful. 

## Defining multiple variables
It is possible to define multiple variables of the same type in a single statement by separating the names with a comma. 
The following code snippet: 
```
int a; 
int b; 
```
is effectively the same as this one: 
```
int a, b; 
```

When defining multiple variables this way, there are 3 common mistakes that programmers tend to make: 

1.The first mistake is giving each variable a type when defining variables in a sequence: 
```
int a, int b; // WRONG (compiler error)

int a, b; // CORRECT
```

2.The Second mistake is to try and define variables of different types in the same statement which is not allowed. 
* Variables of different types must be defined in separate statements

```
int a, double b; // WRONG (compiler error)

int a ; double b; // CORRECT (but not recommended)

// CORRECT and RECOMMENDED (easy to read)
int a; 
double b; 
```
The third issue is in 1.4 when we cover initialisation of variables. 