# 1.4 Variable assignment and Initialisation 

## Variable Assignment
* After a variable has been defined, you can give it a value (in a separate statement) using the ==*=*== operator. 
  * This process is called ==assignment== and the ==*=*== operator is called the **assignment operator**.

```
int width; // here we are defining an integer variable named width
width = 5; // assignment of value 5 into the variable width

//variable width now has value 5 
```
By default, assignment copies the value on the right-hand side of the = operator to the variable on the left-hand side of the operator. *This is known as **copy-assignment***

Once a variable has been given a value. the value of that variable can be printed via ==std::cout== and the ==<<== operator.

> Assignment can be used whenever we want to change the value held by a variable. Here's an example where we use assignment twice: 

```
#include <iostream>

int main() 
{
    int width ; // defining integer variable (width)
    width = 5; 

    std::cout << width; //prints 5 

    width = 7; // We have now changed the value stored in variable width to 7

    std::cout << width; //prints 7 

    return 0; 
}
```

This prints
```
>57
```

When the program above is run, execution begins at the top of the ==main()== function and proceeds sequentially: 
1. First, memory for the variable ==width== is allocated 
2. We then assign ==width== the value ==5==. 
3. When we output the value of ==width==, it prints ==5== to the console. 
4. When we then assign value ==7== to ==width==, any prior value (in this case ==5==) is overwritten.
5. Thus when we output ==width== again, this time it prints ==7==. 
   
> **Key point**
> Normal variables can only hold one value at a time. 

>**Warning**
==*=*== DOES NOT EQUAL == (More on this later)



## Variable Initialisation
The one downside of assignment is that assigning a value to a just-defined object requires two statements: one to define the variable and another to assign the value. 

>These two steps can be combined
>> When an object is defined, you can optionally provide an initial value for the object. 
>> This process of specifying an initial value for an object is called **initialisation** and the syntax used to initialise an object is called an initialiser. 

For example, the following statement both defines a variable named ==width== (of type ==int==) and initialises it with the value of 5: 

```
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int width = 5; // Intialisation of integer variable 'width' with initial value of 5
    std::cout << width; //prints 5 

    return 0;
}
```

In the above initialisation of variable ==width== , =={5}== is the initialiser and ==5== is the initial value. 



## Different forms of Initialisation
Unlike assignment (which is quite straightforward), in C++ initialisation has its own niches which are important to get correct: here is a simplified view to get started: 

There are 5 common forms of initialisation in C++: 

```
int a; // default-initialisation (no initialiser)

//Traditional Initialisation forms: 
int b = 5; // copy-initialisation (initial value after the equals sign)
int c (6); // direct-initialisation (initial value in parenthesis)

//Modern initialisation forms (preferred)
int d{7}; //direct-list-initialisation (initial value in braces)
int e{}; // value-initialisation (empty braces)
```

You may see the above forms written with different spacing ( e.g ==int b = 5;==, ==int d{7};==, ==int e{};==). Whether you use extra spaces for readability or not is a matter of personal preference. 

As of C++17, copy-initialisation (traditional), direct-initialisation (traditional) and direct-list-initialisation (modern) behave identically in most cases. 


## Default-Intialisation
When no initialiser is provided (such as for variable 'a' above), this is called default-initialisation. 
* In many cases, **default-initialisation** performs no initialisation and leaves the variable with an indeterminate value (a value that is not predictable, sometimes called a “*garbage value*”)

## Copy-Initialisation (Traditional)
When an initial value is provided after an equals sign, this is called **copy-initialisation.** 
This form of initialization was inherited from the **C language**.

```
int width = 5; // copy-intialisation of value 5 into the variable 'width'
```
>similar to copy-assignment, this copies the value on the right-hand side of the equals into the variable that is being created on the left-hand side

>**Usage**
Copy-initialisation had fallen out of favor in modern C++ due to being less efficient than other forms of initialisation for some complex types. 
However, C++17 remedied the bulk of these issues and copy-initialisation is now finding new advocates. 
You will also find it used in older code (especially code ported from C) or by developers who simply think it looks more natural and is easier to read.

## Direct Intialisation (Traditional)
When an initialisation is provided inside the parenthesis, this is called direct-intialisation. 
```
int width (5); //direct initialisation of value 5 into the variable with 'width'

```
>**Usage**:
Direct-initialisation was initially introduced to allow for more efficient initialisation of complex objects (those with class types, which we’ll cover in a future chapter). 
* Just like copy-initialisation, direct-initialisation had fallen out of favor in modern C++, largely due to being superseded by direct-list-initialisation. 
* However, direct-list-initialisation has a few quirks of its own, and so direct-initialisation is once again finding use in certain cases.
  
## List-initialisation (Modern)
The modern way to initialise objects in C++ is to use a form of initialisation that makes use of curly braces. 
>This is called **list-initialisation** (or **uniform initialisation** or **brace initialisation**).

List-intialisation comes in two forms: 
```
int width {5}; //direct-list intialisation of initial value 5 into variable width (preferred)
int height = {6}; //copy-list-intialisation of initial value 6 into variable height (rarely used)
```
>**informative tip:**
Prior to C++11, some types of initialisation required using copy-initialisation and other types of initialisation required using direct-initialization. 
>>Copy-initialisation can be hard to differentiate from copy-assignment (because both use an =) and direct-initialisation can be difficult to differentiate from function-related operations (because both use parentheses).

List-initialisation was introduced to provide a initialisation syntax that works in almost all cases, behaves consistently and has an unambiguous syntax that makes it easy to tell where we’re initialising an object.

>**Key Insight:**
When we see curly braces, we know we're list-initialising an object.

* Additionally, list-initialisation also provides a way to initialise objects with a list of values rather than a single value (which is why it is called “list-initialisation”). 
We show an example of this in lesson 16.2 - Introduction to std::vector and list constructors.

## List-intialisation dissalowing narrowing conversions
One of the primary benefits of list-initialistion for new Cpp programmers is that "narrowing conversions" are disallowed. 
This basically means that is try to list-initilialise a variable using a value that the variable cannot hold safetly (i.e using incorrect types) the compiler is required to produce a diagnostic (compilation error or warning) to notify you. 

For example: 

~~~
int main(){
    //by definition an Integer (int) can hold non-frcational values
    //Initialising an int with a fractional value 4.5 requires the compiler to convert 4.5 to a value an int can hold
    // such a conversion is known as a narrowing conversion, since the fractional part of the value will be lost. 

    int w1 {4.5}; // compile error: list-init does not allow narrowing conversion

    int w2 = 4.5; // compiles: w2 copy initialised to value 4
    int w3 (4.5); // compiles: w3 direct initialised to value 4

    return 0; 
}
~~~

On line 7 of the above program, we’re using a value ==(4.5)== with a fractional component ==(.5)== to list-initialise an integer variable (which can only hold non-fractional values). Because this is a narrowing conversion, the compiler is required to generate a diagnostic in such cases.

Copy-initialisation (line 9) and direct-initialization (line 10) both silently drop the ==.5== and initialise the variable with the value 4 (which probably isn’t what we want). Your compiler may warn you about this (since losing data is rarely desired), but it also may not.

**Key Point** 
* Note that this restriction on narrowing conversions only applies to the list-initialisation, not to any subsequent assignments to the variable
~~~
int main() {
    int w1 {4.5} //compile error: list-init does not allow narrowing conversions of 4.5 to 4

    w1 = 4.5 //okay: copy-assignment allows for narrowing conversion of 4.5 to 4

    return 0;
}
~~~

## Value-initialisation and zero-initlisation

When a variable is initialised using an empty set of braces {}, a special form of list-initialisation called **value initialisation** takes place 

In most cases, value- initialisation will implicitly initialise the variable to zero (or whatever value is closest to zero for a given type)
- in many cases where zeroing occurs, this is called **zero-initialisation**
~~~
int width {}; //value init/zero-init to value 0 
~~~

**Side Note** 
For *class types* value initialisation (and default-initialisation) may instead initialise the object to predefined default values, which may be non-zero. 

> **List-initialisation is the preferred form of initialisation in modern C++**
> List-initialisation (including value- initialisation) is generally preferred over the other initialisation forms because it works in most cases (most consistent), it disallows for narrowing conversions (normally don't want as it can lead to loss of fractional information) and it supports initialisation with a list of values. 

> Question: **When should I initialise with {0} vs {}?**
>Answer: Use direct-list initialisation when you're actually using the initial value: 
>~~~
>int x {0}; //direct list-initialsation with initial value 0
>std::cout << x; // Here we are using that 0 value>>
>~~~
> Use value-intialisation when the object's value is temporary and will be replaced: 
> ~~~
> int x {}; //value initialisation
> std::cin >> x; //we're immediately replacing that value so an explicit 0 would be meaningless (user immediately enters value of x they want)


## Initialise your variables
initialise your variable upon creation. 
You may eventually find cases where you want to ignore this advice for a specific reason (e.g a performance critical section of code that uses a lot of variables) and that is okay as long as there is a deliberate and conscious reason to make that choice. 


## Instantiation 
The term **instantiation** is a fancy word that means a variable has been created (allocated) and initialised (this includes default-initialisation)
> An instantiated object is sometimes called an **instance**
> Most often, this term is applied to class type objects, but it is occasionally applied to objects of other types as well. 


## Initialising multiple Variables 
~~~
int a,b ; // create variables a and b, but do not initialise them
~~~

You can also initialise multiple variables together:
~~~
int a =5, b = 6;
int c (7), d (8);
int e {9}, f{10};
int i {}, j {};
~~~

## Unused initialised variable warnings

Modern compilers will typically generate warnings if a variable is initialised but not used (since this is rarely desirable). 
-If "treat warnings as errors" is enabled, these warnings will be promoted to errors and cause the compilation to fail. 

Consider the following program: 

~~~
int main(){
    int x {5}; // variable x is defined 
    // but variable x is not at all used anywhere
    return 0; 
}
~~~

When the program above is compiled with GCC and "treat warnings as errors" is on, the following error is generated: 

~~~
prog.cc: In function 'int main':
prog.cc:3.9: error: unused variable 'x' [-Werror=unused-variable]
~~~

and the program fails to compile!

However there are a few easy ways to fix this: 

1. if the variable really is unused and you don't need it, then the easiest option is to remove the definition of ==x== (or comment is out).
   - After all, if it's not used, then removing it won't affect anything
2. Another option is to simply use the variable somewhere:

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){
    int x {5};
    std::cout << x; // variable now used somewhere
    return 0; 
}
~~~

However this requires some effort to write code that uses it and has the downside of potentially changing your program's behavior. 


## The ==[ [ maybe_unused ] ]== attribute ==C++17==
in some cases, neither of the above options are desirable. Consider the case where we have a set of math/physics values that we use in many different programs. 

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){
    //Example maths and physics values to test the [[maybe_unused]] attribute

    double pi {3.14159};
    double gravity {9.81};
    double phi {1.61803};

    std::cout << pi << "\n" ; //pi used 
    std::cout << gravity << "\n"; //gravity used 
    
    // The compiler will probably complain about gravity being defined but unused

    return 0;
}
~~~

if we use these values a lot, we probably have these saved somewhere and copy/paste/import them all together

However, in any program where we don't use all of these values, the compiler will likely complain about each variable that isn't actually used. 
>In the above example, we could easily just remove the definition of ==gravity==. 
>But what if there were 20 or 30 variables instead of 3 and what if we used them in multiple places?

To address such cases, C++17 introduced the [[maybe_unused]] attribute, which allows us to tell the compiler that we're okay with a variable being unused. 

- The compiler will not generate unused variable warnings for such variables. 

The following programs should generate no warning/ errors: 

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){
    //Example maths and physics values to test the [[maybe_unused]] attribute

   [[maybe_unused]] double pi {3.14159}; //don't complain if pi is unused
   [[maybe_unused]] double gravity {9.81}; // dont complain if gravity is unused
   [[maybe_unused]] double phi {1.61803}; // dont complain if phi is unused

    std::cout << pi << "\n" ; //pi used 
    std::cout << gravity << "\n"; //gravity used 
    
    // The compiler will no longer warn about gravity not being used

    return 0;
}
~~~

Additionally, the compiler will likely optimise these variables out of the program, so that they have no performance impact. 

The ==[[maybe_unused]]== attribute should only be applied selectively to variables that have a specific and legitimate reason for being unused (e.g because you need a list of named values, but which values are actually used in a given program may vary)

Otherwise, unused variables should be removed from the program. 