# Introduction to iostream: cout, cin and endl

## The input/output library
The **input/output library** (io library) is part of the C++ standard library that deals with basic input and output. 
- We will use the functionality in this library to get input from the keyboard and output data to the console. 
- The io part of the iostream stands for input/output. 

To use the functionality defined within the iostream library, we need to include the iostream header at the top of any code file that uses the content defined in iostream like so: 

~~~
#include <iostream>

//rest of code that uses iostream functionality here
~~~

# std::cout
The *iostream* library contains a few predefined variables for us to use. 
- One of the most useful is **std::cout**, which allows us to send data to the console to be printed text. 
- *cout* stands for "character output."

As a reminder if we go to the *Hello world* program: 

~~~
#include <iostream> // for std::cout

int main(){
    std::cout <<"Hello world!"; // print Hello world! to console
    return 0;
}
~~~

In this program, we have included *iostream* so that we have access to std::cout. 
-Inside our *main* function, we use **std::cout**, along with the **insertion operator (<<)**, to send the text *Hello world!* to the console to be printed. 

std::cout can not only print text, it can also print numbers: 

~~~
std::cout <<4; // print 4 to the console
~~~

It can also be used to print the value of variables: 

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){ 
    int x {5}; //define integer variable x, initialised with value 5
    std::cout << x; // print value of x (5) to the console 
    return 0;
}
~~~
This produces the result:
~~~
5
~~~

To print more than one thing on the same line, the insertion operator **(<<)** can be used multiple times in a single statement to **concatenate** (link together) multiple pieces of output

For example: 

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){ 
    std::cout << "Hello" << "world!";
    return 0;
}
~~~
This uses ==**<<**== operator twice, first to output ==Hello== and then to output ==world!==. 

Thus, this program prints: 
~~~
Hello world!
~~~

Here is another example where we print both text and the value of a variable in the same statement: 

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){ 
    int x {5};
    std::cout << "x is equal to:" << x;
    return 0;
}
~~~
This program prints: 
~~~
x is equal to: 5
~~~

## Using ==**std::endl**== to output a newline


What would you expect this program to print out:

~~~
# include <iostream> 

int main(){
    std::cout << "Hi!";
    std::cout << "My name is Arya.";
    return 0;
}
~~~

result: 
~~~
Hi!My name is Arya.
~~~
- Separate output statements don't result in separate lines of output on the console.

If we want to print separate lines of output to the console, we need to tell the console to move the cursor to the next line. 
- we can do this by outputting a newline. 
  - A **newline** is an OS-specific character or sequence of characters that moves the cursor to the start of the next line. 
  - One way to output a newline is to output ==std::endl== (which stands for "end line"):

~~~
# include <iostream> 

int main(){
    std::cout << "Hi!";
    std::cout << "My name is Arya." << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
~~~
This now prints: 
~~~
Hi!
My name is Arya.
~~~


> **Key Insight into std::cout**
> ==std::cout== is buffered
> Analogy: Consider a rollercoaster ride at your favorite amusement park. Passengers show up (at some variable rate) and get in line. Periodically, a train arrives and boards passengers (up to the maximum capacity of the train). 
> When the train is full, or when enough time has passed, the train departs with a batch of passengers, and the ride commences. Any passengers unable to board the current train wait for the next one.

>This analogy is similar to how output sent to ==std::cout== is typically processed in C++. Statements in our program request that output be sent to the console. 
>However, that output is typically not sent to the console immediately. Instead, the requested output “gets in line”, and is stored in a region of memory set aside to collect such requests (called a **buffer**). Periodically, the buffer is **flushed**, meaning all of the data collected in the buffer is transferred to its destination (in this case, the console).

> This also means that if your program crashes, aborts or is paused (for debugging reasons) before the buffer is flushed away, any output that is still waiting in the buffer will not be displayed. 

> The opposite of buffered output is unbuffered output
> With unbuffered output, each individual output request is sent directly to the output device. 
> Writing data to a buffer is typically fast, whereas transferring to a batch of data to an output device is comparatively slow. 
> Buffering can significantly increase performance by batching multiple output requests together to minimise the number of times output has to be sent to the output device. 


## std::endl vs \n

Using ==std::endl== is often inefficient, as it actually does two jobs: 
- it outputs a newline (moving the cursor to the next line of the console)
- it flushes the buffer (which is slow). 
If we output multiple lines of text ending with std::endl, we will get multiple flushes, which is slow and probably unnecessary.

When outputting text to the console, we typically don’t need to explicitly flush the buffer ourselves. 
 - C++’s output system is designed to self-flush periodically and it’s both simpler and more efficient to let it flush itself.

To output a newline without flushing the output buffer, we use ==**\n**== (inside either single or double quotes), which is a special symbol that the compiler interprets as a newline character. 
==\n== moves the cursor to the next line of the console without causing a flush, so it will typically perform better. 
==\n== is also more concise to type and can be embedded into existing double-quoted text.

Here’s an example that uses \n in a few different ways:

~~~
#include <iostream>

int main(){
    int x {5};
    std::cout << "x is equal to: << x << '\n'; //single quoted (by itself) (conventional)
    std::cout << "Yep." << '\n';
    std::cout << "That's all" << '\n';
    return 0;
}
~~~

This prints: 
~~~
x is equal to: 5
Yep. 
That's all
~~~

When ==\n== is not being embedded into an existing line of double-quoted text e.g =="hello\n"==, it is conventionally single quoted ('\n').

> **Best Practice**
> prefer ==\n== over ==std::endl== when outputting text to console. 


## std::cin

==**std::cin**== us another predefined variable in the ==iostream== library. 
 - Whereas ==std::cout== prints data to the console (using the insertion operator ==<<== to provide the data), ==std::cin== (which stands for "character input") reads input from keyboard. 
 - We typically use the extraction operator ==>>== to put the input data in a variable (which can then be used in subsequent statements). 

~~~
#include <iostream> //std::cout and std::cin

int main(){ 
    std::cout << "Enter a number: "; // asks user for a number
    int x {} ;  // define variable x to hold user input (and initialise it)
    std::cin >> x; // get the number for user input and store it in variable x
    std::cout << " You entered: " << x << "\n";
    return 0;
}
~~~

Try compiling this program and running it for yourself. 
When you run the program, line 5 will print “Enter a number: “. 
When the code gets to line 8, your program will wait for you to enter input. 
Once you enter a number (and press enter), the number you enter will be assigned to variable x. 
Finally, on line 10, the program will print “You entered ” followed by the number you just entered.

For example (entering the value 4 as input):

~~~
Enter a number: 4
You entered: 4
~~~

Just like it is possible to output more than one bit of text in a single line, it is also possible to input more than one value on a single line: 

~~~

#include <iostream>

int main(){
    std::cout << "Enter two numbers separated by a space: "
    int x {}; // define variable x to hold user input (and value-initialise it)
    int y {}; // define variable y to hold user input (and value-initialise it)
    std::cin >> x >> y; // get two numbers and store in variable x and y respectively
    std::cout << "You entered: " << x << " and " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
~~~

This produced the output: 

~~~
Enter two numbers separated by a space: 4 5
You entered: 4 and 5
~~~

## ==**std::cin**== is buffered 

In a prior section, we noted that outputting data is actually a two stage process:

1. The data from each output request is added (to the end) of an output buffer.
2. Later, data from (the front of) the output buffer is flushed to the output device (the console).

> **Key Insight**
> Adding data to the end of a buffer and removing it from the front of a buffer ensures data is processed in the same order in which it was added. 
> This is sometimes called FIFO (first in, first out).

Similarly, inputting data is also a two stage process:

- The individual characters you enter as input are added to the end of an input buffer (inside std::cin). The enter key (pressed to submit the data) is also stored as a '\n' character.
- The extraction operator ‘>>’ removes characters from the front of the input buffer and converts them into a value that is assigned (via copy-assignment) to the associated variable. This variable can then be used in subsequent statements.

> **Key Insignt**
> ==std::cin== is buffered because it allows us to separate the entering of input from the extract of input. 
> We can enter input once and then perform multiple extraction requests on it.


## The basic extraction process 

Here is a simplified view of how the ==>>== works for input: 

1. If ==std::cin== is not in a good state (e.g. the prior extraction failed and std::cin has not yet been cleared), no extraction is attempted, and the extraction process aborts immediately.
2. Leading whitespace characters (spaces, tabs, and newlines at the front of the buffer) are discarded from the input buffer. 
   1. This will discard an unextracted newline character remaining from a prior line of input.
3. If the input buffer is now empty, operator ==>>== will wait for the user to enter more data. Any leading whitespace is discarded from the entered data.
4. operator ==>>== then extracts as many consecutive characters as it can, until it encounters either a newline character (representing the end of the line of input) or a character that is not valid for the variable being extracted to.

For example, given the following snippet: 

~~~
int x {};
std::cin >> x;
~~~

Here is what happens in three different input cases: 

1. If the user types ==5a== and enter, ==5a\n== will be added to the buffer: 
    - ==5== will be extracted, converted to an integer, and assigned to variable ==x==.   
    - ==a\n== will be left in the input buffer for the next extraction.
2. If the user types ‘b’ and enter, ==b\n== would be added to the buffer. 
    - Because ==b== is not a valid integer, no characters can be extracted, so this is an extraction failure. 
    - Variable ==x== would be set to ==0==, and future extractions will fail until the input stream is cleared.
3. If ==std::cin== is not in a good state due to a prior failed extraction, nothing happens here. The value of variable x is not altered.